[Music]
did you know you could sell a $20 bill
for ten times its value or then a person
you're physically attracted to may not
be as smart and funny as you think these
things are called cognitive biases and
they rule your entire life without you
even knowing it
here are some of the most prominent ones
starting with number 7 phenomenon of Max
bazerman how hard could it be to take 20
bucks from an mba student in fact
professor max bazerman proves it's easy
peasy
in 2010 he first conducted an experiment
at his class where he organized a simple
auction he would give a $20 bill to the
student who pays the most for it the
bidding started at $1 the only rules of
the auction where that bids could only
go up by $1 no less no more and that the
second-best bidder would pay the whole
sum of their bid to the professor so
let's say the best bid was $18 then the
second-best would be 17 dollars the one
who paid $18 would receive the auction
bill and win 2 bucks well the one who
bid 17 would just pay the money and
receive nothing simple right
well at first the auction went as
planned but the stakes rose pretty fast
and soon the bids reached the nominal
value of $20 a pause ensued and then
someone bid 21 students started laughing
at that but surprisingly the bidding
didn't stop the auction was turned
basically to farce at this point
continued until the students finally had
enough the $20 bill was sold for 200 $4
the overall sum the professor won
totaled $387 as bazerman explained after
the end of the auction it was the
typical picture for any business person
he conducted the same experiment with
CEOs of major companies and still
managed to sell the 20 bucks above their
face value it all boils down to the fact
that nobody wants to be the second
bidder
and lose money without winning anything
back so the auction continues until
someone sees the fallacy and decides to
stop the race sometimes as you can see
it happens much too late
number six decoy effect let's say you're
at an electronics store choosing a new
SD card for your camera you see two
options before you one has the capacity
of 64gb and costs $15 and the other has
a storage space of 128gb but costs $30
there's an equal chance of you choosing
either of them some will prefer greater
capacity while others will go for lower
price which one would you choose by the
way let me know down in the comments
okay and now a third option appears this
SD card has the capacity of 96 GB which
is higher than the first but lower than
the second but its price is higher than
both it's $35 this option is called a
decoy and its role is to make the
pricier second SD card more favorable in
the eyes of consumers indeed when you
look at all three options you actually
consider only the first two because the
third one is worse than either of them
still you now look at the 128gb card
from another angle it's cheaper than the
96 GB one and as more storage space
making it better in all respects the 64
GB card though is only cheaper than the
96 GB one but its capacity is lower it's
kind of obvious that you would choose
the best one right well marketing
specialist got you there the only reason
why there's this third option on the
market is to create this decoy to make
you buy a more expensive product
insidious number five halo effect enough
talk about money let's switch to other
concerns ever thought how in movies and
cartoons good characters are often
depicted as beautiful and attractive to
the eye while evil baddies usually have
some repugnant features like crooked
teeth warts or something like that this
is how our person
option of good and bad personality is
shaved you may not notice this but when
you see an attractive person you tend to
exaggerate their good traits of
character and that's the gist of the
halo effect but there's more to it than
that it's not only about the physical
features but the overall impression a
person makes if he or she is nice and
charming we often extend these qualities
so everything there is to that person
and our mind draws them also as smart
funny and witty hmm now that I know this
I'll probably trust my judgment of
people a bit less oh well number four
framing effect imagine you're presented
with the choice of two medical
treatments for some disease let's not go
into particulars here the package insert
for the first one says it has 80%
effectiveness against the disease while
the second one is described as having
20% chance of failure if you look
closely at both of them you'll easily
see that they're absolutely similar like
the same event but according to
statistics the vast majority of people
would choose the first treatment over
the second this is what the framing
effect is about we tend to prefer an
option that is described in a positive
way even if the only other option is
absolutely the same people will likely
disregard it because it's been given a
negative description remember the 20%
chance of failure that's it and the
effect actually applies to anything
politicians and marketing specialists
alike use it a lot in their campaigns so
pay attention to the deeper sense not
the words that frame it number 3
illusion of control this cognitive bias
is probably one that describes human
nature at best so tell me first when is
there a higher chance of getting into a
road accident when you're driving a car
or when someone else is at the wheel and
you're just a passenger sound off in the
comments I'll tell you what the
statisticians say about it in a minute
in the meantime hear this
professor Ellen Langer conducted several
studies to research the perceived
control over a situation one of them
involved a lottery her subjects were
either given tickets at random or got to
choose their own none of them knew the
winning combinations so they couldn't
possibly know which tickets would have a
higher chance of payoff still the
participants were allowed to exchange
their tickets to try and win more money
as a result professor Langer saw that
people who chose their own tickets were
more reluctant to part with them also
the tickets with familiar symbols were
less often traded than ones bearing
different unfamiliar signs on top of
that even if the odds were better
subjects with tickets they had chosen
themselves were less likely to trade
them this shows that although the
situation is completely random people
tend to think their choice somehow
affects the results we like to be in
control of everything don't we well I
promise to tell you the statistics for
the car accident so here it is the vast
majority of drivers think that the
chances of them getting into one are
much lower if they're driving than if
they're riding as passengers such
confidence that was it true for you to
give me a like if that was number two
dr. Fox effect don't get confused by the
name it's not after any doctor in fact
quite the opposite the experiment that
gave this effect its name was conducted
in 1970 when two speakers gave lectures
to an audience of trained psychiatrists
and psychologists the topic was chosen
specifically so that none of the
trainees knew anything about it for the
experiment to be valid the catch was
that one of the lecturers was a real
scientist while the other was an actor
Michael Fox under the alias of dr. Myron
L Fox an Albert Einstein College of
Medicine graduate when both the actual
scientist and the actor gave the lecture
in a monotonous manner the students gave
better feedback to the real lecturer and
perform better on the test
but when they were both asked to present
the material in a more lively way joking
and engaging the audience dr. Fox was
rated as highly as the actual professor
moreover the lecture was deliberately
full of double-talk contradictory
statements and downright nonsense but
despite all that the student spoke very
highly of dr. Fox's professionalism and
that's what's so disturbing about the
whole effect the positive attitude and
liveliness of the actor completely
fooled a whole audience of highly
educated specialists if you ever heard
motivational speakers and got inspired
by their ideas well chances are you've
also experienced the dr. Foxx effect
Congrats
number one spotlight effect if you've
ever felt self-conscious leaving your
house in different socks worrying that
everyone would laugh and point fingers
at you you've become a victim of the
spotlight effect it's a psychological
bias that basically makes you think too
much of yourself you're the center of
your own world that's for sure no one
lives your life for you and that's why
you notice every little detail in
yourself and you naturally tend to think
that everyone else will also see that
strange new mole on your forearm or that
your nails aren't properly manicured but
let's be honest how often do you notice
such tiny things in others
my guess is almost never that's because
everyone's too concerned with themselves
to pay much attention to other people
but don't get all upset about this it's
a widely common effect just try not to
think too much of your own importance in
the life of complete strangers so which
of these effects have you experienced on
your own let me know down in the
comments if you learn something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
anywhere just yet we have over two
thousand cool videos for you to check
out all you have to do is pick the left
or right video click on it and enjoy
stay on the bright side of life
you